Small changes (#6858)
magento/devdocs: src/guides/v2.3/migration/extend-the-tool.md

---
group: migration-guide
title: Extend the migration tool
functional_areas:
  - Tools
---

Sometimes the data format and structure created by [Magento extensions](https://marketplace.magento.com/extensions.html){:target="_blank"} or custom code is different between Magento 1 and Magento 2. Use extension points within the Data Migration Tool to migrate this data. If the data format and structure are the same, the tool can automatically migrate the data without user intervention.

During migration, the [Map Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#map-step) scans and compares all Magento 1 and Magento 2 tables, including those created by extensions. If the tables are the same, the tool automatically migrates the data. If the tables differ, the tool terminates and notifies the user.

 {:.bs-callout-info}

> Read the [Technical Specification]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html) before attempting to extend the Data Migration Tool. Also review the [Migration Guide]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/bk-migration-guide.html) for general information about using the migration tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read the [Technical Specification]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html) before attempting to extend the Data Migration Tool. Also, review the [Migration Guide]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/bk-migration-guide.html) for general information about using the migration tool.
```

</destination>
```

> -  Unnecessary data from the `great_blog_index` index table should not be migrated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Do not migrate unnecessary data from the `great_blog_index` index table.
```

-  The table `great_blog_publication` was renamed to `great_blog_post` in Magento 2, so data will be migrated to the new table.
   -  The `summary` field was renamed to `title`, so data will be migrated to the new field.
   -  The `priority` field was removed and no longer exists in Magento 2.
   -  The data in the `body` field has changed format and should be processed by the custom handler: `\Migration\Handler\GreatBlog\NewFormat`.
-  A new ratings feature was developed for the "GreatBlog" extension in Magento 2.
   -  A new `great_blog_rating` table was created.
   -  A new `great_blog_post.rating` field was created.

### Extend mapping in other steps

> Other steps support mapping, such as the [EAV Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#eav) and the Customer Attributes Step. These steps migrate a predefined list of Magento tables. For example, suppose that the "GreatBlog" extension has an additional field in the `eav_attribute` table and the name changed in Magento 2. Since the table is processed by the [EAV Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#eav), mapping rules should be written for the `map-eav.xml` file. The `map.xml` and `map-eav.xml` files use the same `map.xsd` schema, so mapping rules remains the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other steps support mapping, such as the [EAV Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#eav) and the Customer Attributes Step. These steps migrate a predefined list of Magento tables. For example, suppose that the "GreatBlog" extension has an additional field in the `eav_attribute` table and the name changed in Magento 2. Since the table is processed by the [EAV Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#eav), mapping rules should be written for the `map-eav.xml` file. The `map.xml` and `map-eav.xml` files use the same `map.xsd` schema, so mapping rules remain the same.
```

Unlike the [Map Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#map-step), these steps scan a predefined list of tables instead of all tables.

For major data format and structure changes, create a custom step.

### Create a custom step

Using the same "GreatBlog" example, suppose the extension has one table in Magento 1, but was redesigned to have two tables in Magento 2.

In Magento 1 there was a single `greatblog_post` table:

| Field     | Type     |
|-----------|----------|
| post_id   | INT      |
| title     | VARCHAR  |
| content   | TEXT     |
| author_id | SMALLINT |
| tags      | TEXT     |

In Magento 2 a new table for tags `greatblog_post_tags` was introduced:

| Field      | Type     |
|------------|----------|
| post_id    | INT      |
| tag        | VARCHAR  |
| sort_order | SMALLINT |

Magento 2 `greatblog_post` table now looks like this:

| Field     | Type     |
|-----------|----------|
| post_id   | INT      |
| title     | VARCHAR  |
| content   | TEXT     |
| author_id | SMALLINT |

> To migrate all data from old tables structure to a new one you can create a custom step in the `config.xml` file. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To migrate all data from the old table structure to a new one you can create a custom step in the `config.xml` file. For example:
```

 {:.bs-callout-info}
Refer to [Configuration]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#configuration), [Step internals]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#step-internals), [Stages]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#step-stages) and [Running modes]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#running-modes) for more information.

Complex SQL queries can be assembled inside these classes to fetch and migrate data. Also, note that these tables should be "ignored" in the [Map Step]({{ page.baseurl }}/migration/migration-tool-internal-spec.html#map-step) because it scans all existing tables and tries to migrate the data unless it is in the `<ignore>` tag of the `map.xml` file.

> For Integrity checking, define additional map file in `config.xml`. It is used to verify that tables structure is as we expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Integrity checking, define an additional map file in  the `config.xml` file to verify that tables structure is as we expect.
```

```xml
<config xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xs:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:magento:module:Magento_DataMigrationTool:etc/config.xsd">
    ...
    <options>
        ...
        <greatblog_map_file>app/code/Vendor/Migration/etc/opensource-to-opensource/map-greatblog.xml</greatblog_map_file>
        ...
    </options>
</config>
```

Map file `map-greatblog.xml`:

```xml
<map xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
     xs:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:magento:module:Magento_DataMigrationTool:etc/map.xsd">
    <source>
        <field_rules>
            <ignore>
                <field>greatblog_post.tags</field>
            </ignore>
        </field_rules>
    </source>
    <destination>
        <document_rules>
            <ignore>
                <document>greatblog_post_tags</document>
            </ignore>
        </document_rules>
    </destination>
</map>
```

> Integrity checking class `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Integrity` extends `Migration\App\Step\AbstractIntegrity` and contains the `perform` method where we verify tables structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrity checking class `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Integrity` extends `Migration\App\Step\AbstractIntegrity` and contains the `perform` method where we verify table structure:
```

            }
            $this->destination->saveRecords($destinationDocName, $recordsToSave);

            $tags = $this->getTags($items);
            $this->destination->saveRecords('greatblog_post_tags', $tags);
            $this->progress->advance();
        }

        $this->progress->finish();
        return true;
    }
    ...
}
```

In a Volume class `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Volume`, we check if the data has been fully migrated:

```php
class Volume extends \Migration\App\Step\AbstractVolume
{
    ...
    /**
     * @inheritdoc
     */
    public function perform()
    {
        $documentName = 'greatblog_post';
        $sourceCount = $this->source->getRecordsCount($documentName);
        $destinationCount = $this->destination->getRecordsCount($documentName);
        if ($sourceCount != $destinationCount) {
            $this->errors[] = sprintf(
                'Mismatch of entities in the document: %s Source: %s Destination: %s',
                $documentName,
                $sourceCount,
                $destinationCount
            );
        }

        return $this->checkForErrors(Logger::ERROR);
    }
    ...
}
```

> To add delta migration functionality, add a new group to `deltalog.xml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add delta migration functionality, add a new group to the `deltalog.xml` file.
```

```php
class Delta extends \Migration\App\Step\AbstractDelta
{
    /**
     * @var string
     */
    protected $mapConfigOption = 'greatblog_map_file';

    /**
     * @var string
     */
    protected $groupName = 'delta_greatblog';

    /**
     * @inheritDoc
     */
    public function perform()
    {
        $sourceDocumentName = 'greatblog_post';
        $idKeys = ['post_id'];
        $page = 0;
        while (!empty($items = $this->source->getChangedRecords($sourceDocumentName, $idKeys, $page++))) {
            $this->destination->deleteRecords(
                'greatblog_post_tags',
                $idKeys,
                $items
            );

            $tags = $this->getTags($items);
            $this->destination->saveRecords('greatblog_post_tags', $tags);
        }

        //parent class will take care of greatblog_post records automatically
        return parent::perform();
    }
}
```

After the custom step implementation provided in the examples, the system will take data from the single Magento 1 table,
process it using `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Data` class and store the data in two Magento 2 tables. New and changed

> records will be delivered on delta migration using `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Delta` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
records will be delivered on delta migration using the `Vendor\Migration\Step\GreatBlog\Delta` class.
```
